This is a book about relationships and how to make them better.

A relationship is meant to benefit your life.
When you have another person in your life, there are emotional and material gains. Another person gives you advice, drives you to the airport, gives you confidence, lends you money, makes you feel safe and together. A relationship supplies you with a teammate. This goes for all relationships including friends, family, significant others.

To be more specific, a relationship is meant to be mutually beneficial.
As teammates, you focus on making sure your partner's needs are taken care of, and they do the same for you. In this way, you each magically get more out of the relationship than you put in. You can think of this as "expanding the pie." In economics this phenomenon is referred to as the "division of labor." 

Over time, you want your relationship to become close and strong.
The closer and stronger your relationship, the better you are able to supply your partner's strongest needs, the better they supply yours. The healthier and more successful you will come up together. You're standing in the same elevator. 

(potted plants. less happy alone than together)

In the process of getting closer to another person, there's always friction. Some aspect of your relationship stresses out one or both of you. If one or you are stressed out, that's bad for your life. If the stress gets bad enough, there's no other option but to split up.

These frictions happen 1000 times a day. My coworkers danny agapito really didn't like how loud ate my cheerios. Shari  felt like I wasn't giving her enoughs sex. My little sister didn't like my girlfriend Angela's negative attitude. My mom threatened to skip my wedding because of my tattoos.

So, to resolve the friction in our relationships, we go through this simple process:
1. You express yourself to your partner. They have to understand what you communicated.
2. They express themselves to you. They have to actually get through to you too.
3. Together you come up with a creative solution that leaves you both feeling better than before.
This is a process of communication followed by problem solving. It happens constantly and automatically. The shorthand I'm using is abc->123.

If you can manage to communicate and problem solve, then you have a healthy relationship. One that's always moving forward.
So I ate my cheerios in the next room over, I let Shari know that if she wants sex we have to do it before 9:30, my sister and Angela talked out their issue, and my Mom ultimately came to my wedding anyway.

Sometimes though, even if you communicate and problem solve, you and your partner may still split up. This happens when you talk it out, crunch the numbers, and you find out that there's an insurmountable obstacle between you. For example. I have a friend named Ben. He had a girlfriend named Amy, they had been together a year. He wanted to spend more time focusing on Parkour and she felt that she needed more attention. They talked it over and found out that there was no space between. They needs at that time were incompatible. So, they split up amicably and without a fight.

But just because you split up doesn't mean you have an unhealthy relationship. It just meant that you simply didn't have the resources to keep it going. It also doesn't mean that the relationship fell apart. As far as I know Ben and Amy still maintain a frienship which benefits them both.


If a healthy relationship is one where you communicate and problem solve.
And unhealthy one is where you don't communicate and don't problem solve.

1. Whoever is stressed doesn't communicate to the full extent of their ability
2. And/or whoever is listening doesn't understand what the first one said
3. And/or once you've got your cards on the table, it doesn't occur to you that a compromise is actually possible.

So you get stuck with that same piece of stress jamming up your relationship.
Take the example of Ben and his Girlfriend. Suppose they never had that frank discussion. Ben would slowly come to resent Amy for interfering with his training, Amy would come to resent ben for neglecting her needs. By the time they break up, they may not be able to maintain a healthy friendship.
Take also the example of my mom and my tattoos. My mom gave me an impossible choice. It looked like I had to somehow sandpaper off all my tattoos or my mom wouldn't come to my wedding. It could have easily put a huge stress on our relationship, she might not have come to my wedding, i could be estranged from my mother right now.

This is the sort of situation that we are all familiar with in our own relationships. When our relationships fall apart, it's rarely a sterile amicable discussion. It's a lot of anger, suspicion, stress. This friction is portrayed in movies, books, tv shows, plays, and has been as long as people have been making art.

If a relationship falls apart for this reason, it is very sad. Because, in the case of me and my Mom, there wasn't really any insurmountable obstacle in our relationship, just a matter of communication. I know this because I did talk it out with my mom. And after a lot of arguing and being sad, we both ended up happy.

I believe that this is the case with most relationships. There is no insurmountable obstacle. There's just a jam in the plumbing. If you and your partner could just get through to each other, you could be happy and both your lives would be better. This book is about teaching yourself to unplug these jams. By deliberately communicating and problem solving. 

However, that is much easier said than done. Unplugging james is essentially the service that a counselor provides. And people pay hundreds of dollars an hour and sometimes never get anywhere.
As far as self-help, thousands of books have been written and tools invented to improve communicating, listening, being assertive, negotiating. It's very difficult to do. In my experience, though, even people who are very well-spoken team players and great problem solvers still have relationship problems.

Many team leaders who are great at talking and listening in the office have problems at home. Think  alsoof the cliche of the therapist who's own life is messed up. I actually saw this once in Julia's parents. They were both therapists and, according to Julia, had a very stressed-out marriage. Julia herself was always stressed-out.

In my experience, raw skill at communicating, listening and problem solving isn't enough because it is completely eclipsed by a much more powerful force. Negativity. Things like sarcasm, passive aggression, namecalling, patronizing, yelling, threatening, hitting, neglect, disrespect. These negativities make a relationship feel unsafe and break down trust. In the presence of negativity, the best communications rapidly turn to gibberish.

Some of this behavior is unavoidable, even desirable. We all get cranky when we're tired or hungry or something. It's part of being human. The problem is when the disrespect and neglect go beyond.

And in all the relationships I've ever been in, it went beyond. My earliest memories involve my mother screaming at me and my sisters. My mom regularly criticized my dad in public, and my dad regularly hurt her feelings. Julia used to leave my apartment when we'd argue and I'd get so mad that I'd writhe on the floor.
And I don't think I'm unique, in fact I think that I've hade uniquely good relationships. All of our relationships are all completely loaded with passive aggression, namecalling, disrespect. For many of us, this negativity is so common that we forget that it's not normal. Or necessary.

The reality is that treating someone else badly, no matter what they've done, ios always the wrong thing. The wrong thing for their own ethical development, for your relationship with them, for your life individually.
To have a healthy relationship, the primary target must be to eliminate the regativity inside of us and inside of our partners.
This is much easier said than done.

All of us harbor deeply ingrained attitudes toward other human beings. This attutude becomes an intrinsic part of our worlview. We are filled with thousands of exceptions by which we feel it is justifiable to treat someone else badly. When our partner hurts us, we will argue that it is okay to seek revenge, or at least payback. We want to teach someone a lesson who is not paying attention. We belittle soemone else's feelings if they are being a baby, or acting hysterical. We strech the meaning of self-defense as far as it will go.

Our desire to hurt another person is pure motional junkfood. It feels good, and to some extent, we can't avoid it. But we all harbor an elaborate mythos about how good for us it is to hurt other people.

Even if you decide, with all your coniction, to give up aggression and disrespect cold turkey, your instincts will betray you. Like an alcoholic, you will always come up with some excuse for why you had to scream and fight.

Futhermore, most of us have only known relationships with an excessive amount of negativity. This means that we have an incomplete understanding of what a healthy relationships is supposed to look like or how a negative situation can be resolved in a positive way.

We're going to have healthy relationships it will be insufficient to exert willpower or to cultivate idealism about loving our fellow human (althoug those things are useful in their way).
What we need
1. a coordinated plan of action
2. a complete shift in how we see other people.
3. a ground-up reeducation about how a healthy relationship looks and operates.


Ground rules for overcoming friction in a relationship.

you have no wrong feelings
you have no wrong feelings, 
	even if it makes your partner feel bad
your feelings are important
you can't change how you feel
you deserve to be treated the way you want to be treated
you don't have to do anything you don't want to do
	if you do it, you should feel good about it
if you got hurt, you deserve an apology
you don't need to tolerate abuse, even from a very sick person
there's no valid reason to threaten, belittle, attack, or disrespect
it's okay to break up

