=====
Title
=====
The Good Technique

=======
Summary
=======
This is about conflict resolution. How to have more productive less painful conflicts.

=====
Intro
=====
Conflict is unavoidable in a relationship. People get grumpy, get under each other's skin, and have disagreements. It's commonly believed that conflict is a purely bad thing. After all, nobody likes getting grumpy and arguing. Some people try to avoid conflict altogether. But even though conflicts are painful, they do serve a productive purpose.

Typicially we keep our true feelings to ourselves. Conflict provides an opportunity for you and your partner get your true feelings out on the table. By the end of a conflict, you should reach a resolution where you and your partner agree on new terms which will prevent the same situation from breaking out in the future. When it's over, you should both feel closer and more understanding of one another.

Of course, this is not how most conflicts go down. In the real world, conflict means anger, guilt, and hurt feelings. When you and your partner have conflict, your participate in things like sarcasm, name calling, glaring, talking down, yelling, and all other forms of negativity. You feel as if you are engaged in a battle. You think about your relationship in terms of "winning" and "losing," of "standing your ground" and "giving up." These conflicts are rarely resolved in a way which leaves you and your partner feeling satisfied and closer to one another. Generally, they just fizzle out and you never talk about them again.

Conflicts like these are unproductive. Instead of bringing you closer in your partnership, each conflict takes you two steps backward. And the longer you handle your conflicts this way, the deeper you fall into a vicious cycle. You develop negative feelings about your partner. You feel that they actually "want" to hurt you or that they don't care about you at all. You have many unhealed injuries and tensions in your home are quick to escalate. You know that another bad conflict is going to happen sooner or later.

Of course you're always trying your best to communicate with your partner. But once you're caught up in a vicious cycle, it's very hard to get out. You try and say how you feel but the message just does not get through to your partner. They brush you off, belittle you, or even get angry at you for trying to communicate clearly.

If this goes on long enough, you might think about leaving your partner. But if you can't or won't or shouldn't, you end up feeling trapped and frustrated. In the end you just resign yourself to the idea that things will never get better. That's your life and there's no use rocking the boat.

As much as you want to act nonchalant about your relationship problems, we both know that poor conflict resolution is a significant stress on your life. For one thing, your partner never learns to treat you the way that you want to be treated. How can you relax knowing that your partner might invade your boundaries at any second. For another thing, you never learn how to avoid the same conflicts in the future. How can you relax knowing that anything you say or do might explode a whole new conflict. And most importantly, you and your partner never get the chance to take back the mean things you've said and done. How can you feel safe around someone who has hurt you so many times and will certainly hurt you again? That is not a healthy way to live.

The truth is that you don't have to live this way. Your relationship can be better and it will get better with my help. Communication is hard and you've failed many times in the past. But back then, you didn't have any tools.

When you're doing any job, you need the right tools. If you're trying to pull a 4 inch nail that's 3 inches deep in a piece of wood, you don't use your fingers. You get a hammer. If you want to lift a car, you could never do it with your own muscles. But a jack makes it easy.

And if you want to resolve a conflict, your intuition doesn't always serve you well. But I'm going to provide you with tools that make every conflict more productive. I'm going to show you exactly the do's and don'ts. I'll teach you how to set strict boundaries while never crossing over your partners. You will learn how to express how you feel, bring out the best in your partner, and get treated the way you deserve to be treated. Of course, you can only change your own behavior. But if you follow my advice, you will feel better at the end of a conflict, no matter what your parter does.

===========
The Program
===========
----------------
Acknowledgements
----------------
You are here to improve your own life.
The first step of this program is to acknowledge that you are here to improve your own life. You're not here to be nice, you're not here to do the right thing, you're not here to be a martyr. Human beings are extremely sensitive creatures and our relationships are everything to us. Acknowledge that the poor communication in your relationship hurts you and you deserve better. This is the most certain way to become happier and healthier in your life.

You can't change your partner.
Come to terms with the fact you can't change your partner. Nobody has that power. Your partner may never get the message and may always stay angry and confused. You are learning how to set your own healthy boundaries and respect your partner's boundaries for your own sake. This way of living will improve your life even if your partner never changes their ways. To some extent, your partner will have no choice but to treat you better. By your own actions you will feel better, and you will treat yourself better.

You are part of the problem.
Come to terms with the fact that you are not perfect. Nobody is perfect, you are no exception. You are a good person and you are always trying your best. But you have a temper, you get negative, you don't listen. You might argue that your partner is the bigger part of the problem. That your partner is more mean, negative, and unrespesponsive. That may be true, but that doesn't change the fact that there are apologies you deserve to give and changes that you need to make about your own behavior. Learn to admit that you're wrong.

The good technique works.
In the following pages you might think that I'm asking you to be "nice" to your partner. You might not like this idea. You might say "If my partner is disrespecting and hurting me, why should I be nice?" We are not following this program because we want to be nice. We're following it because it works.
In the following pages you might think that I'm asking you to admit defeat. You might say "if I just let my partner win, then they'll walk all over me." The reality is the opposite. Negativity in a relationship signals weakness. The strongest upper hand you can ever gain on another person is by treating them with respect and kindness. Even if someone is very abusive, even if they are crazy, you don't gain anything by crossing the line and acting ugly to them. Even if you have to leave comeone, even if you have to call the cops or put them in a headlock, you are doing so with compassion and understanding at the front of your mind.

The good technique is not infallible.
Throughout this program you are going to find every reason imaginable to doubt, deflect, and throw in the towel. Resist this temptation. Relationships don't change overnight. It takes three months to potty train a dog. Your human relationship will take even more time. But even the smallest steps of progress are a huge relief.

(You are doing the right thing)

----------------------
A Healthy Relationship
----------------------
Many of us live our entire lives without ever participating in a deeply healthy relationship or without seeing a healthy relationship to model after. We get a lot of our relationship information from what we see on TV or read in books. This leaves us with a handicap. It is important to understand what a healthy relationship looks like so you know what to demand from your partner. It is also important to know what what lines you must not cross.

The following are the rules for a healthy relationship:

1. You have no wrong feelings
2. Your feelings are not wrong even if they make your partner feel bad
3. Your feelings are important
4. You deserve to express your feelings
5. You can't change how you feel
6. You deserve to be treated the way you want to be treated
7. You don't have to do anything you don't want to do. If you do anything, you should feel good about it
8. If you got hurt, you deserve an apology. You are the only one who knows if you got hurt
9. You don't need to tolerate abuse, even from a very sick/sad person
10. There is never any valid reason to threaten, belittle, attack, or disrespect. Even if your partner did the same things to you. If you did these things, then it's your job to apologize
11. You must have other relationships.
12. It's okay to break up

The rules for a healthy relationship are not just theoretical. They are talking points and places to stand your ground. Think of them as your Bill of Rights. Throughout your relationship, your partner is going to try to convince you that your relationship allows for some unhealthy exception.

For example, you partner might try to convince you that one of your feelings is a "wrong" feeling. They might say "You shouln't be jealous of me for spending time with my best friend. That's petty." Or "You shouldn't get angry at me for throwing out your old shirt. Grow up" The reality, or course, is that you have no wrong feelings. You can't turn your feelings off, and you shouldn't try to. Certainly, you shouldn't yell and call names because of your feelings. And you should try not to get hysterical. But that's different from having "wrong feelings".

This situation happens over and over. Your partner will relentlessly try to bend every rule of healthy relationships. Your partner will try to convince you: that your feelings don't matter on their birthday because they are the more important than you. Or that you shouldn't express your feelings because it's too painful to listen to you. Or that you have to have sex tonight because that's what you agreed to when you got married. Or that you don't deserve an apology because it happened so long in the past. Or that you screwed up dinner so that's why it was okay to call you stupid. The list could go on forever.

When this happens, you should rely on the rules for a healthy relationship. Trust them and don't back down. Say them to your partner with conviction:
1. I have no wrong feelings
2. My feelings are not wrong even if they make you feel bad
3. My feelings are important
4. I deserve to express my feelings
5. I can't change how I feel
6. I deserve to be treated the way I want to be treated
7. I don't have to do anything I don't want to do
8. I deserve an apology. I'm the only one who knows if I got hurt
9. I don't need to tolerate abuse
10. There's never a reason to disrespect me
11. I need to have other relationships
12. It's okay to break up

========
Conflict
========
99% of our time in a relationship is peaceful. Most of our activity is spent eating together, sitting together, going out, watching tv, brushing our teeth, and sleeping. When a conflict suddenly breaks out it doesn't last long, maybe an hour if that. But even though we only spend 1% of our time fighting, these moments are what determine the course of our relationships.

There are endless reasons for two people to fight. Money, politics, sex. Forgotten birthdays. Unwanted comments. Misunderstood anxiety. Your partner slurps their cheerios to loudly. You want to get to the show on time but your partner always make you late. Uncalled-for disrespect.

A conflict happens in 3 parts. They start out hot and gradually cool down.
1. The early  moments of a conflit are usually where the most damage is done. When a fight breaks out, you tend to yell, glare, and be generally negative. This negative behavior, even if it feel justified, is poisonous for your relationship.

2. The middle part of a conflict should contain a discussion. This is where you actually talk about the issue at hand in a neutral way. You talk about why your birthday matters so much to you or why you're always late for the show.

3. The last part of a conflict is the resolution. This is where you both get back onto the same page. Here you each apologize to one another for the negativity that happened along the way. You agree on what you each  expectat from your relationship. And you make an agreement about what you're each going to do differently moving forward.

How to Resolve a Conflict
The Basic Strategy
You and Dad are human beings. You are always going to get angry, you're always going to fight. The goal is:
1. To take the edge off of the fighting. Instead of fighting with bare knuckles, you'll fight with puffy gloves. 
2. Even while you're fighting, constantly remind Dad that you care about him. Even while you push Dad away, you want to simultaneously pull him back.

Basic Concepts
Monkey-See Monkey-Do
The golden rule says "treat others the way that you would like to be treated." This makes sense, in part, because other people learn to treat you exactly the way that you treat them. You need to "be" the change that you want to see in Dad. If you want Dad to be calm and understanding, then you have to model calm and understanding behavior. Don't make the mistake of thinking that you can get dad to be calm and understanding even though you're yelling and screaming. Think of this exercise as "hypnotizing" dad. Although you can't literally "change" Dad, your actions have a bigger affect than you realize.

Make the First Move
To improve your life, you'll want to get your partner to apologize, to treat you with respect, to attend to your needs, and ultimately to provide you with love and support. But you can't just demand apologies and respect out of the blue. If you want those things from your partner, you're going to have to make the first move. This means you're going to have to make yourself a little bit vulnerable, uncomfortable, and open to criticism. You're sometimes going to have to stir the pot and open up old wounds. And you're always going to try to be the bigger person.

In Times of Peace
Say "I Care About You"
You need to establish positive feelings toward each other. Freak mom out one day by looking her in the eyes and saying "I care about you Sue." If that's too big a step, send her a text message that says "I care about you Sue." If that's too big a step, just buy her flowers. Or a get her a card.

No matter what you say, the point is to make mom feel that you care about her. Make her feel that she is a human being and that she matters in this world. This is essential for any functional relationship. If mom feels that you don't care about her, why should she be nice to you? Would you be nice to someone who doesn't give a damn about you?
But if you can make mom believe that you care about her, then she will treat you better. If she becomes convinced that you care about her, she will lose her inclination to disrespect you and will be open to changing her behavior. In addition, 90% of all the snapping at you that mom does is perceived self-defense. If mom doesn't feel that you hate her, she won't need to defend herself from you. 

This is by far the easiest way to create peace in your home. If you do this on a regular basis, your conflicts will become significantly more peaceful and a significant number of conflicts will be avoided altogether.

You might object "but I don't feel that way toward her any more. We've been through too many bad things." I know that you don't feel passionate for Mom these days. I know you're not sure that you even love her or if you want to be buried next to her. But the fact of the matter is that you live together. You spend time together. You're married. You loved each other once. You spent 30 years together. Like it or not, you care about her. Human beings care about the people they are close to.

If you don't feel honest saying "I love you," then don't say it. You should only ever speak from the heart. But if you dig deep, you will always find some phrase that lets your partner know that they are more than a stranger to you. Say "you are important to me" or "I care about how you feel" or "I want you to be happy" or "You are my wife and my partner." Saying something earnest like this will probably not feel comfortable. That's fine. If anything, feeling a little uncomfortable means you're on the right track.

Don't skip this step. There are no unimportant steps in this book. Once you choose your positive phrase, we're going to reuse it over and over throughout the following techniques.

---------
Apologize
---------
Over the years you and Mom have had many hundreds of conflicts. Regardless of who was wrong or right, those conflicts left both of you feeling hurt and confused. To this day, you and Mom still carry those hurt feelings inside of you. And with those hurt feelings you each also carry negative feelings toward each other.

While you can't change history and you can't erase those hurt feelings, there is something useful that you can do: apologize. We teach children to apologize when they get into a fight. Why should it be any different for adults?

Go ahead an apologize any time of day. An apology doesn't have to be elaborate or elagant. While you're standing around in the kitchen or just after you get home from work, just come out and say "I want to apologize for the last time we argued." Or try "I know I'm not always that nice. So, I'm sorry." Maybe there's something specific that you want to apologize for. For example, you might say "I'm sorry that I told you that you're fat and that you're a cold fish" or "I'm sorry for losing my temper and breaking one of our vases."

The point of this exercise isn't to find the precise right words. It's simply to apologize and to mean it. Think back to the negative things that you said to Mom. Feel rightfully sad that you said those things. Now, put those feelings into words and aplogize.

An apology works very well for several reasons. By apologizing to Mom, you show that you care about her. After years of conflict, Mom has started to think that you don't care about her. She feels that, when the two of you fight, you say negative things purely because you don't like her. By apologizing, you correct Mom's negative line of thinking. You are telling her that you do care about her, that you don't want her to feel hurt, and that you are willing to humble yourself to make her feel better. This establishes the prescedent that Mom is your priority and reinforces her belief that the two of you are on a team.

Apologizing also makes you nonthreatening. Over the years Mom has come to see you as an antagonist. When she pictures you in her mind, many of her memories involve you doing and saying negative things to her. What's worse, she feels that you are proud of your negative behavior and that you intend to hurt her again. But when you apologize, you show Mom that you are aware of your negative behavior and that you are not proud of it. You clarify that you don't do negative things because you enjoy it, you do it because you're a human being and you are imperfect. Most importantly, it let's Mom know that you want to do better.

By letting Mom know that you want to do better, you are, little by little, bringing mom onto your "team." Currently, your temper is something that you dealt with on your own. It is something that you both live with, but didn't talk about openly. By apologizing, your temper becomes a project that you and Mom work on together. You can come up with strategies together about how to avoid a fight when your get angry.

As a result of your apology, your own life will improve.
For one thing, Mom will treat you better. She will have more patience and more willing to agree with you. She will be more willing to compromise and happier to do you favors. You will find her smiling at you more, complimenting you, and encouraging you. When you express a need to her, she will be more inclined to listen. She will become more proactive and attentive to your needs. If you are the sort of person who likes to receive gifts, she will tend to bring you gifts. If you are the sort of person who needs to be physically touched, you fill find her touching you more frequently. If you need to hear words of praise, you will find her praising and appreciating you. Even the first signs of this positivity from Mom will quickly remind you how valuable it is to be in a healthy relationship.

On the other hand, your apology will also make Mom less negative. You will find her less likely to snap and to criticize. She will be less defensive and prickly. She will not feel good about disrespecting or belittling you. She will be less inclined to raise her voice, less willing to mock you, less likely to call you names.

Finally, by apologizing to Mom, she is much more likely to apologize to you. This is the final and most important benefit of apologizing to Mom. 

----------
Objections
----------
You might say "But what if it's not the right time to apologize? What if it's too soon? What if it's too late? What if I just come across sounding stupid?" It's easy to come up with reasons why you shouldn't do the right thing. But do we teach children to wait for the perfect moment to spring an apology? No, we tell them to apologize immediately. The fact of the matter is that most people like it when you apologize to them. 9 times out of 10, the apology will work like magic. 

You might still object "but what if I'm opening up old wounds?" It's true, apologizing for a conflict that's already over with can turn a peaceful evening into a tense one. But the fact of the matter is that those wounds aren't healed an gone. You may not notice them, but you haven't apologized yet for negative things you did, then Mom is still hurting deep down. If you really think that the apology will do more harm than good, then you don't have to apologize. I trust your judgement. But don't make a habit out it. You're best off making a personal principle out of apologizing early and often.

Finally, you might object the premise of making the first move. You might say "Why should I be the one to apologize? Mom hurt me too. Let her apologize first." You're right, it's not fair. You deserve to an apology just as much as Mom does, if not more. But this book isn't about pure fairness, it's about how to improve your own life. And if you want to have a happy life, get used to being the bigger person.

------------------
Ask for an Apology
------------------
Over the years you and Mom have had many hundreds of conflicts. Regardless of who was wrong or right, those conflicts left both of you feeling hurt and confused. To this day, you still carry those hurt feelings inside of you. And along with those hurt feelings you carry negative feelings toward Mom.

You are a human being. Just like mom, you carry around hurt feelings which affect your self-esteem. Even if you did and said negative things, you still deserve and apology for the negative things that Mom did and said to you. The apology will make you feel good; it will make you feel important and cared for. It will work wonders for your self-esteem and you outlook on life in general.

Go ahead and ask for an apology any time of day. While you're standing around in the kitchen or just after you get home from work, just come out and say "I don't feel good about the last time we argued. I'd like an apology please." Or try "I know I'm not always that nice. But I feel like I deserve an apology" Maybe there's something specific that you want to apologize for. For example, you might say "I still feel bad because you told me that I'm fat and that I'm a cold fish" or "I want you to apologize to me for losing your temper and breaking one of our vases."

As a rule, you should try not to ask for an apology unless you've already apologized yourself. This is not because you don't deserve an apology as much as Dad (you definitely do). You apologize first because this will soften Dad up and give you the best chance of success. For the sake of your own happiness, get used to making the first move and being the bigger person.

----------
Objections
----------
Even if you've already apologized to Dad, he will probably resist apologizing to you. Nobody wants to admit they've done anything wrong, humble themselves or feel vulnerable. By asking Dad to apologize he might get defensive, and maybe even get angry.

In that case you might say: "why should I ask for an apology if it's only going to make Dad angry? I don't need an apology that badly." The fact is that you deserve an apology. A healthy relationship is a two-way street with no room for martyrdom. You don't avoid that road just because it's bumpy. You drive that road back and forth until it flattens out. If Dad resists apologizing or gets defenseive, you calmly ride it out until your message gets through.

Dad might try to tell you "I don't need to apologize because I didn't say anything wrong." The fact is that you Dad doesn't get to decide whether he said anything wrong. In a healthy relationship, he should attend to your feelings purely because you feel them. Say to him "I am the only one who knows if I got hurt. I feel hurt and I want your help." Dad might try to tell you that you are being too sensitive. He might say "you shouldn't feel bad just because I called you a cold fish. It was only a joke." Stand up for your feelings even if they don't make sense to Dad. Say "Even if it was a joke, I still feel bad. It's okay for me to be sensitive. If I feel bad then I deserve an apology."

Oliver objects: This offended me. You can't say that any more!

Dad might try to say "I don't need to apologize because you were the one who was wrong. You said mean things to me." Remind Dad that conflict isn't a competition. It's not a game of absolute right and wrong. Go ahead and acknowledge that you did the wrong thing: "I'm sorry that I said mean things to you. I am not proud of what I did." But insist that you deserve an apology too: "But my feelings were hurt too. I am a good person. If my feelings were hurt, then I deserve an apology."

Be persistent. Dad will do everything he can to avoid apologizing. If it looks like the situation is getting heated, take a break to let things cool down. Wait until the next day. Or next week. In the end, you might see that Dad isn't going to give you the apology you require. You might have to accept that and move on. But don't let that discourage you the next time you have a conflict. By demanding that your relationship follow healthy rules, you are not being selfish. You are making a serious investment in your own happiness and in your partner's happiness.

-------------
Make Positive Statements (General Technique)
-------------
When you are dealing with Dad, especially when you are standing up for your rights it's important to 1. Focus on yourself and 2. Be positive.
After all these years of conflict, Dad is defensive. He is able automatically see anything you say or do as an attack. So, avoid statements that focus on Dad and begin with the word "you." For example, try not to say "YOU don't think my feelings are important" and "YOU just want to hurt my feelings." These statements feed Dad's preconceived belief that you are out to attack him and make sure that he become defensive right away. That's why we use "I" statements. It's better to say "My feelings are important" or "If my feelings were hurt, I deserve an apology." These statements frame the conflict in a healthy way by taking the focus off of Dad an putting it where it belongs: on you and your feelings. You have no interest in putting Dad down and criticizing him just for fun. All you want is a respectful and healthy relationship.

You also want to avoid negative statements. Saying "I hate this relationship" or "I'm the only one who does any work around here" is not going to bring Dad onto your team. It's better to use positive statements such as "we are a team" and "I am a good person." These statements catch Dad off guard. In Dad's mind a conflict is not about feelings, it is about fighting and winning. By reframing the conflict, he will be less likely to resort to his automatically defensive responses. Slowly, you will teach Dad that conflict is not about coming out on top, it's about coming together.

--------
Positity is Hypnotic
--------
Positive statements are not only good for calming down a situation, they also give you the opportunity to "hypnotize" Dad. Right now, Dad spends a lot of time acting negative, defensive, and bad-tempered. Wouldn't you be happier if he acted positive, open, and calm? You can affect Dad's personality by treating him like person you want him to be. If you treat Dad like a villain, he will act like a villain. So if you say "you just like to see me suffer," Dad will start taunting you and calling you names. But, deep down, everyone wants to feel like a hero. So if say "I know that you care about my feelings," he will soften up and become receptive to your feelings. If you say  "you never do any work around here," he will immediately lay on the couch. But if say "you work hard for our family and I appreciate that," he will be much more inclined to pick up the slack.

(At first he might be skeptical: "I'm a good person too! You're not the only good person!" This is the perfect opportunity. Say "Yes, you are a good person. You are a good husband who takes care of me." He might get mean: "I don't want to be on your team!" Don't let his negativity throw off your technique. Reply "well, I want to be on your team. You are important to me and I care about you")

-----------------------------
Having a Fight
-----------------------------
Fights break out for any number of reasons. You're cranky, you're tired, you're irritated from work. You and your partner start arguing about money or politics. Your partner spills a drink all over the floor. You make an insentitive comment about your partner's mom. Your partner randomly takes the opportunity to call you names, put you down, act sarcastic. The examples are endless.

-------------
Getting Angry
-------------
Getting angry is a part of being alive. Being angry doesn't necessarily involve another person. When you stub your toe or lose at solitaire, it makes you angry. You yell and curse and you might even kick the inanimate object that you stubbed your toe on. When you're angry by yourself, there's not much to do besides take deep breaths and calm down. But the story changes when I'm directly involved in making you angry.

There are many ways that I can get under your skin. Sometimes, I make you angry by directly being aggressive toward you. But I want to talk about the times that I make you angry without intending to. For example, I might sing loudly when you want peace and quiet. I might leave my socks all over the house. I might make us late to the show by waiting until the last minute to get ready. I might forget your birthday or our anniversary. I might eat the cupcake that your boss gave you. I might not be very supportive when you're going through a tough time. I might trash talk someone you care about.

You might think that getting angry is purely bad, but that's not true. Anger serves a real purpose. It lets us know that something is wrong, and we both need to work out a solution. Whatever you're angry about, your anger is legitimate. You might be angry about something that happened in the 3rd grade or about something that happened in a dream. Great, you still have every right to feel angry, and those feelings should mean something to both of us. You might be tempted to hold in your anger, but that path is not sustainable. Sooner or later, you will explode with much worse consequences for both of us. You deserve to say how you feel and I deserve to listen. Once we have gotten both our feelings out on the table, we will come up with a creative plan of action which suits both our needs and boundaries.

The first step for turning your anger into a positive outcome is to ride out with the immediate tantrum. When you're angry, you're not in your right state of mind. You are most likely to lash out at me, to glare, to be sarcastic, to slam doors, and to generally make me feel unsafe and unwanted. If the situation between us is sufficiently tense, you might hurt me in ways which you can would like to take back later; but there are some things you cannot take back. You must avoid these negative behaviors.

--------------------------
Transform your Anger into Sadness
--------------------------
As soon as you feel yourself starting to get angry, I want you to transform your anger into sadness. Deliberately change your facial expression from a glare to a dejected frown. Instead of yelling and jabbing your finger, imagine yourself feeling like a sad little kid. Picture the way you felt as a child when you lost your balloon or your cousin was mean to you. Instead of blowing up, like magic, you will find yourself closing down. This is a powerful technique which will yield big dividends if you can learn to do it.

Why does this technique work? Anger is a response to pain. But so is sadness. We prefer to feel angry because anger makes us feel much less vulnerable than sadness does. But at the end of the day, anger and sadness are just two different expressions of the same feeling. Let's suppose that I accidentally step on your toe. A moment after I put down my foot, you feel an exposive signal coursing through your body. You might assume that anger is the only natural response; if you aren't cursing and shouting, you must be repressing yourself. But you might try making a frown, imagining yourself as a sad and vulnerable person. You will be surprised at how true that expression feels and how easily your body runs with it. You might even find that the feeling of sadness is actually much more real than your automatically angry response.

Why would we rather feel sad than angry? Two reasons. 1. Although anger is real and is a lot of fun to experience, we often use the experience of anger to paper over our more vulnerable feelings. You will find that, often, sadness is primarily what you were feeling all along. 2. Because anger is not something that we want to direct at our loved ones. We don't want to repress our anger or hide the fact that we are angry. But we want to aim the sharp end away from people we care about. Save your anger for burglars and sports events.

---------
Disengage
---------
The timeline of the fight has just begun. You have done your best to experience as much anger as possible sadness. However, this first technique might not have succeeded. Your emotions might have gone off like a bomb before you knew what hit you. When you're seeing red like this, your only option is to disengage.

When you disengage, that means that you separate yourself from me. Leave the conversation, leave the room, cover your head with a blanket and sing happy birthday. Just find a way to be by yourself until you can calm down. You will find that, even when you are by yourself, you are furious! There will be a whole argument raging just inside of your own head. Stay by yourself, find a good distraction, and don't come out until the voices in your head turn into a dull hum.

Sometimes you are not in a position to easily leave the situation. Suppose you are driving and I realize that I left the our tickets to the concert at home. You are furious. You can feel the desire to scream at me burning inside you.But you have nowhere to run, and we're already going to be late to the show. I'm sure that, in your life, you've suffered through a whole half-hour car ride while someone chews you out. Don't repeat their mistake. Pull over, park, and leave the car until you calm down. It doesn't matter how late we are to the show; our relationsihp has to take prescedence over everything else.

But what if you literally can't escape? What if we are stuck like sardines in the back of a crowded public bus for the next 45 minutes when I reveal that I left the tickets at home? The answer is: get creative. Do anything you can to preserve our relationship. Close your eyes. Cover your ears. Take deep breaths. Look the other way. Furiously tie your shoelaces. Recite the abc's backward. Snap your wooden pencils in half. Put your headphones in and play hard rock at full blast. Do this until you calm down and are ready to say how you feel with reason and balance.

----------
Objections
----------
At this point in the fight timeline, you've managed to calm down. You can still feel anger inside of you, but at least it's not controlling your thoughts and actions. Your logical mind is back in the driver's seat. The next step is to say how you feel.

But first, let's address a few objects that you might have raised while reading the previous techniques. For one, you might object to the idea that you should calm down when you get angry. You might argue, for example: "I have a good reason for being angry. You were singing at the top of your lungs at 10pm when I was trying to sleep. Why should I let you get away with it?" Or you might say "I am only angry because you forgot my birthday! I've never forgotten your birthday before. Why should I be a saint when you get to be careless?"

The reality is, that by staying calm, you're not letting me get away with anything. As soon as you calm down, you are going to let me know exactly how you feel and exactly what I did to make you feel that way. But you're going to do it without being negative and without hurting me. If you cut loose and yelled and glared, there's a good chance that I wouldn't be receptive to your feelings, and neither one of us would feel any better.

------------
I get Angry at You
------------
There are many ways that you can get under my skin. Sometimes you sing loudly when I want peace and quiet or leave your socks all over the house. You might make us late to the show by waiting until the last minute to get ready. You might forget my birthday or our anniversary. You might eat the cupcake that my boss gave you. You might not be very supportive when I'm going through a tough time. You might trash talk someone you care about.

You might think that getting angry is purely bad, but that's not true. Anger serves a real purpose. It lets us know that something is wrong, and we both need to work out a solution. Whatever I'm angry about, my anger is legitimate. I might be angry about something that happened in the 3rd grade or about something that happened in a dream. Great, I still have every right to feel angry, and those feelings should mean something to both of us. I am often tempted to hold in my, but that path is not sustainable. Sooner or later, I will explode with much worse consequences for both of us. I deserve to say how you feel and it is your responsibility to listen. Once we have both said all we want to say about the subject, we will come up with a creative plan of action which suits both our needs.

That said, you find yourself the unfortunate recipient of my anger. The first step for turning my anger into a positive outcome is to ride out my immediate tantrum. When I'm angry, I'm not in your right state of mind. This is when I am most likely to lash out at you, to glare, to be sarcastic, to slam doors, and to generally make you feel unsafe and unwanted. If the situation between us is sufficiently tense, I might hurt you in ways which I would like to take back later; but there are some things I can never take back. You must not allow yourself to get caught up in my tantrum.

------------
1. Disengage
------------
The only way to respond to my tantrum is to wait it out. Logic and reason are useless against a ranting human. This means that you break eye contact, leave the conversation, leave the room, or even leave the house. Wait a solid length of time and check to see if I'm calm and capable of rational thought. If I'm not ready to be rational, repeat the process until I am. This might only take a few minutes. Or it might last a few days. Be prepared to wait as long as it takes for me to calm down before you try to talk to me like a human being.

That said, waiting it out isn't so simple. You might want to postpone the fight, but I'm not on board. I'm still angry and I want you to be as angry as me. I'm going to try to bait you back into fighting. I'll yell at you. I'll call you names. I'll get bug eyes. I'll keep arguing the same point. I'll say "we're not having a dog and that's final" or "if you walk out that door you can forget about having thanksgiving here." I might even directly say "no, we're not waiting to have this fight! we're doing this right now!"

But no matter what trick I use or how irritating I become, don't take the bait. By yelling and getting riled up, I'm proving to you that I'm not in control. I am saying to you "I'm not in my right state of mind right now. I'm not in any position to make a logical argument or to fully respect your feelings." You might object "so if you're yelling and calling me names, I'm just supposed to lie down and take it?" No, you don't lie down and take anything. You disenage from me.

When you act calm and adult, it should go a long way toward making me feel calm and adult. When I realize that you don't plan to freak out at me, I don't need to freak out at you. But, even if you play everything perfectly, I might not calm down. Sometimes, the calmer you try to be, and the more you try to get away, the angrier I get. Perhaps it's because seeing you nice and calm makes me feel scared and stupid to be yelling at someone who's just being quiet. Maybe it makes me feel like I'm going to get in big trouble when this is all over. Whatever the reason, I need to learn that I freaking out is not an option.

Hold strong. Say "I'm not ready to talk yet. Give me five minutes and then we'll see." Or don't say anything. Let me yell until I'm done yelling. Say "I don't want to be yelled at. I'm going to be by myself for a little while." Or say "I don't like the way this feels." Or simply cover your head and dive under the blankets nervously muttering "no no no, I don't like this, I don't like this." Whatever you do, find safety for yourself. Don't let me continue to make you feel uncomfortable. Go to the basement. Go in the bathroom. Go out to your car. Close your eyes and cover your ears. Sit with the family dog.

When you disengage, you'll want to provide an explanation. Be sure to use "I" statements in your explanation. Say "I" need to calm down or "I" need some space or "I" don't feel good. Focus mostly on yourself, not on me. Try not to say "you" need to calm down or "you" need to step away from me or "you" clearly have a problem.

When you disengage, you might be tempted to adopt a "holier than thou" attitude as if you are better than me for keeping your cool. This sort of negativity only fans the flames. Don't say "I'm going to leave until you can be adult about the situation." Or "you're always yelling, you're just like your mother." These statements might make you feel like you're "winning" the fight, but in reality we're both losing. Be content to disengage and make a clean break.

----------------
Say How you Feel
----------------
Once you and I calm down, you'll still be angry and upset. Picture the scene: We've just exploded into a fight at the dinner table. So we disengage. I go off to our bedroom. You turn on the TV. We're both still muttering to ourselves and arguing in our heads. After 15 minutes we let off enough steam that we start to feel a little remorseful about how we acted. I come out of the bedroom, you turn off the TV. We're both still upset, suspicious, and ready to fight again if necessary. But at least for now, we can think clearly. It's time to say how we feel.

Saying how we feel is something that people naturally do when they fight. We automatically try to explain (usually with raised voice) why we got so mad to begin with. We say things "how could you forget to pay the phone bill!?" "I don't think you even care that I get my diploma next week." Or "How would you like it if I joked about your weight!?" "I'm so tired from doing 12-hour shifts and I just want to sleep."

Although it might seem like we only say these things because we want to point fingers and cast judgement, there is actually a very good reason to say how you feel. When I fight, it's because I feel threatened by you or by the world around me. But if I can make you understand how if I feel, then you and the world aren't so threatening any more. Once you understand how I feel, I know that you're on my side: you can help me come up with solutions, give me support and encouragement or change your own behavior to help keep me from feeling bad again. For example you might put reminders in your calendar to help you pay the phone bill, say lots of encouraging things to convince me that you care about my diploma, promise not to joke about my weight any more, or help me call my boss and negotate shorter work days.

On the flip side, if I can't get you to understand how I feel, then I'm always going to feel slightly threatened or neglected by you in our relationship. If you can't understand me, then that means you can't help me fix my problems or change your own behavior. I will slowly learn that I can't rely on you and that will make us more likely to fight in the future. Unless are certain that we are on the same page, our fight will continue forever. This means that you need to say how you feel in a way that I will understand.

------------
"I" Statements
------------
Expressing your feelings is easier said than done. Even with your best intentions it might come out aggressive, or too focused on the facts without enough of the feeling. To help you, practice using something called an "I" statement. An "I" statement is a statement about yourself; not about me. Typically, such statements start with something like "I feel," "I want," "I like," or "my" as in "my feelings," "my life," et cetera. A good example of an I statement is "I feel bad when we're late to the show." Or "It hurts my feelings when you yell at me."

When it comes time to say how you feel, there's no need to craft a perfect argument. Just use an "I" statement. Say "I don't know why but it upsets me that you don't want to vote in the next election." Or "I wasn't trying to do anything wrong, I just bought all that frozen food because it was on sale." Or "It sets off my OCD when the car is parked all crooked." Or "I had a really bad experience at public school and I really don't want to send our kid to one." Or "I'm so hungry and I'm really grumpy right now." Go ahead, just let it out.

Of course, even when you're talking about your own feelings, sometimes there's no avoiding talking about me. Sometimes you need to say "I didn't like YOU joking about my weight" or "I don't think YOU were very supportive about my diploma" or "I'm so mad that YOU forgot to pay the phone bill." No problem. Even when you're talking about "me" and what I did, you can always spin a statement to focus more on you. For example, you might say "when you joke about my weight it makes me feel terrible." Notice the emphasic on feelings. It also helps to add some detail about why you feel the way you do. You might go on to say "I know you think you're only joking but my mother used to tease me about my weight all the time. It's something that I've always had a problem with and it's not something I'm ready to laugh about." Dig deep and do your best to say uncomfortably honest things. Try saying "I worked really hard to get my teaching license and I've been under a lot of pressure lately. When I go to the library to study you always get upset and it makes me feel like I'm abandoning you and that's not fair." Or say "When you forget to pay the phone bill it puts a huge stress on my life. It also makes me feel like I'm not important. I need my phone for work and my family doesn't know what happened to me."

(An I statement works poorly when you focus too much on dad's wrongdoings or use the opportunity to say negative things. It's unproductive to say "It hurts my feelings when you treat me like shit," or "I feel bad that you only care about yourself." In that case, dad is going to get defensive. These statements sound like they're about you, but they contain negative judgements about dad. It's better to stick to the facts: "It hurts my feelings when you forget my birthday" or "I feel bad when you criticize me in front of my family.")

An I statement works for several reasons. The most important reason that an I statement works is because it gets to the heart of the issue. You. Your feelings. I am a typically human being which means that I think that every situation is about me. If you say anything critical to me, I assume that you're just trying to put me down. If you say "you don't care about getting anywhere on time," now the focus is on me. This gives me license to protest and fight and tell you about all the other times you made us late for events. But the story changes if you say "I feel bad when we're late to the movie." This is because, when you use "I" statements, you are insisting to me: "this isn't all about you Dorian." "My goal in life is not to put you down. All I want is to get to the movie on time and to feel that my needs are respected"

"I" statements are also useful because they humanize you. That is, they make you appear nonthreatening. Like any other human being, I prefer to see myself as a big victim and you as a big antagonist. Like a chameleon, I have the ability to respond to almost anything you do or say as you are threatening or criticizing me. If you say something even marginally critical such as "I don't like your tone of voice" I'm capable of going into a full-blown defensive panic. I'll start telling you that I can talk however I want, that you never like anything that I do, and that I do way more for our family than you do anly. But if you just spin it slightly and say "Your tone of voice hurts my feelings," suddenly I'm caught off guard. You're telling me that you're a human and have feelings and that makes me feel a little bad about attacking you. I'm much more likely to take responsibility for my own actions when I don't feel like I'm under the gun.

Rocky: very educational
Oliver: the parts about using tricks or techniques really round out the theory
Maybe bring in some of the other books and research on the subject
Mention that "I" statement is an official thing
Go through all the techniques afterward and trying to source them
Source something in the upcoming chapter. See how it hits

---------
Listening
---------
Now that you've said your your piece, it's time for you to listen. Now I get to tell you why I got so mad in the first place or just generally express how I'm feeling.

It is very important for you to listen to how I feel. How can we respolve our conflict unless you know what's going on inside of me?

Listening is easy. As long as you keep quiet and open up your ears, you're doing all you need to do to have a successful conflict resolution. Beyond that, anything else you do is okay. For example, it's okay if you stare at your feet instead of looking into my eyes. It's okay if you don't repeat what I say back to me or ask me pointed questions. And it's okay if you don't respond with phrases like "I understand" or "I really hear where you're coming from." Just listen, that's good enough.

Whatever I say, It's probably going to be negative. I might say things like "I don't need you babying me just because I'm sick" or "you never invite me when you go out with your friends" or "look I'm exhuasted I just need some space!" or "I don't want you hanging around that woman from work." Your role in all this is simple: you just sit back and let me talk until I've said what I need to say.

When I speak, especially if I'm being negative, you will be tempted to interrupt me. Resist that temptation. Even if I say things that don't make logical sense. Even if I say things that are inaccurate. Even if I mix up my timelines, or stutter, or pause to think. Just let me blabber.

----------
Objections
----------
You might object "wait a minute." Why should I allow you to say things don't make logical sense? How are we supposed to resolve a conflict based on inaccurate information. The reason that you listen closely to what I say, regardless or how silly it sounds, is that the listening process is not about making sense. It's about self-expression. When you let me blabber, it makes me feel good. I feel that you are on my team. This listening process could easily go back and forth 50 times. The last few rounds are about logical analysics, but the first few rounds are all about bringing us both back to earth.

But when you interrupt me, it's just the opposite. That makes me feel like you don't care about how I feel. Remember that this fight has only started a few minutes ago and both of us are still somewhat hurt and scared. Even if you're only interrupting to say "actually we went to the mall on Thursday," that only feeds my inborn insecurites and negative thoughts. Better not to take that chance.

----------
Boundaries
----------
You can't let me abuse you. If I am yelling and calling you names, then there is nothing for you to listen to. Disengage, be immovable object, do not engage with me until I calm down. I will do my best to gaslight you. I will insist that you "listen" to me make accustions, tell you how bad you are, or explain how ofensive your inherrent personality is to me. For example, I might say that "you make me look stupid too when you dance awkwardly like that" or "you only care about yourself" or "if you were a real man you would fight my ex boyfriend over what he said.

When you try to disengage, I won't let you. I'll continue to gaslight you even harder. I'll say "what, so now you don't care about my feelings? I listened to everything you just said." Or I'll say "how could you treat me this way. If only your mother was alive to see this." I'll make threats: "if you walk out that door, consider this realtionship over" or "I'll kill myself if you leave."

Do not, for any reason, let me hurt you. Even slightly, even one Iota of pain. If it feels wrong, then it is. If our relationship can't withstand a simple disengage, then we don't have a real relationship, and there's nothing you can do to help me.

---------
Barriers to Saying How you Feel
----------
Even if you are skilled at making "I" statements, saying how you feel is much easier said than done. There are many obstacles to saying how you feel. Sometimes we are ashamed to say our feelings, sometimes we don't know exactly what to say, and other times we're not even certain how we feel. It is important to overcome these barriers because our relationship is a partnership, not a one-on-one. If we're going to have a shot at actually solving our problems, I need to know what's going on inside of you. This section offers some explanations and techniques.

-----
Shame
-----
We are often ashamed of our feelings. Even if we logically accept that we have no wrong feelings, we may still be plagued by feelings of shame. People are ashamed of any sort of feeling that has ever made them stand out. such as phobias. Perhaps you are afraid of dogs, leaving the house without makeup, germs, highways, elevators, terrorists, airplanes, enclosed spaces, rabies, or public speaking. You might be ashamed because your feelings seem abnormal. Perhaps you don't want to get pregnant, don't want to have sex, want to wear a dress, or want to have kinky sex. You might be ashamed because your feelings don't fit your social role or the image that you have of yourself. Perhaps you're black and you're afraid to "talk white," you're a gay man and you're afraid to act maculine, you're an old person and you're afraid to be forgetful, or you're a woman and you're afraid to be called "bossy." You might be ashamed because you and I are in a relationship, and your feelings are something that I don't want to hear. Perhaps you want some alone time, want to take a vacation by yourself, aren't attracted to me when I have a moustache, have a problem with your mother-in-law, or don't like having to take care of me when I'm sick.

There is no silver bullet for making you stop being ashamed of your feelings. The important thing is that, if this feeling is important to you, you need to eventually tell it to me. If you are not ready to tell me how you feel, try talking about your feelings in a safe environment until you are. Tell your feelings to your best friend, your mother, mother in law, teacher, professor, guidance counselor, nurse, sponsor, therapist, or mentor. Talking about your feelings takes the edge off in a big way. Ask your friend to say positive affirmations to you such as "your feelings are not wrong" "it's okay to be afraid of dogs" "it's okay to want kinky sex" "it's okay to dislike your mother in law" "you are good and right." If you do not have any friends, relatives, or therapists, then you must quickly make some (remember that our relationship will not work unless we both have other relationships). But if your friends and family are not available at the moment, try saying your feelings to your dog, repeating them in your head, or writing them down. Repeat the same positive affirmations to yourself that you would like to hear from another person.

-----------------------
I Don't Know How I Feel
-----------------------
Sometimes I have trouble saying how I feel because I don't actually know how I feel. This is a very common problem. For example, sometimes I wake up cranky, and I have no idea why. Other times I leave work feeling great, but I have a panic attack once I get on the highway. Some days I can't stand when Rain pulls on her leash, and other days I find it adorable. If you asked me "why did are you so cranky" or "why did you have that panic attack?" I would not be able to answer your question. It's possible that there is a very clear reason beneath the surface which explains my emotions. Perhaps we had a fight last week and I still have unresolved feelings, thus making me cranky and panicky. But even if there is a clear "cause" for my feelings, I might live my whole life without ever knowing what that root cause was.

Although we all want to know exactly what's going on in our own minds, the reality is that those root causes are not essential for a successful conflict resolution. If we have just had a fight, it is enough for you to simply describe how you feel right now in this moment. If you're angry, just say "I'm angry" if you're sad, just say "I'm sad." I might put pressure on you to provide a more detailed expression. I might say "yes but why are you so angry!?" or "come on, you're not sad for no reason." Don't let me convince you that you must always be able to read your own mind. Tell me "I don't know why I'm feeling this way" or "I'm not comfortable talking about it just yet." If I continue to pressure you, remain firm. Insist to me "I don't need to explain my feelings."

------------------------
Say Exactly how You Feel
------------------------
Saying how you feel is easier said than done. You will find yourself taking your best shot at explaining your feelings, but continually missing the mark. Sometimes, we are more negative than we want to be. For example, you want to say something matter of fact like "it makes me nervous when we go running from place to place" but it comes out as "don't you dare rush me when I'm trying to enjoy my weekend." Other times, we choose perfectly accurate language, but it doesn't quite convey the emotional message that we want. For example, you want to say "sometimes your dad scares me" but instead it comes out as "your dad is weird I won't want to sit next to him." Other times we we choose the wrong words, our words don't match our body language, or we're not even certain how we feel in the first place.

-------------
Talk like Kid
-------------
One way to say exactly how you feel is to talk like a kid. Little kids have a painfully earnest way of expressing themselves. They come right out and say "you're hurting my feelings" or "I want to do it myself!" without considering the ramifications to their reputation or public image. They are dramatic and exagerated, leaving no room to mistake what kind of emotion they are feeling. Try for yourselef to express yourself this way. Say things like "you have to to ask me nicely" or "I'm scared to be alone" or "It's my turn to drive the car" or "my coworker made me sad" or "that's not fair!" Continue on to adopt a child's body language and facial expressions. If you're mad, jump up and down. If you're sad, perform a deep frown and hide your face with your hands. If you're frustrated, run in place and shake your head. Go the extra mile and adopt the funny tones of voice that children use. If you want to get me to hurry up for the concert, do a drawn out "pleeaaaaase will you hurry for the concert?" Children like to replace sharp sounds with softer ones. So if you're sorry, look at your feet and say a drawn out "Aaahhmm sorrrry." Even if you're mad, make a comically angry face, bounce your head and say "no! no no no."

Talking like a little kid is useful for many reasons. For one thing, it will give you the feeling that you have expressed precisely the emotions that you are feeling inside. You might think that it will be difficult to express yourself this way, but the truth is just the opposite. In my experience, we adults constantly feel the impulse to act like children. When you start expressing yourself in a dramatic and unmistakable way, it feels like you are unlocking your true feelings, as opposed to teaching yourself a new skill. (you might think this is just some quirky thing to maybe try. no this is serious. this is about saying your feelings. you do this when you want to fucking scream and throw shit. this is your life. this is who and what you become)

For another thing, talking like a little kid is very disarming. Like any other human being, I prefer to see myself as a big victim and you as a big antagonist. Like a chameleon, I have the ability to respond to almost anything you do or say as you are threatening or criticizing me. Suppose that you say something even marginally critical such as "I don't like your tone of voice. In that case, I'll start telling you that "I can talk however I want," or "you never like anything that I do," and that "I do way more for our family than you do." But when you speak to me in the same way that a little kid speaks, I get caught off guard. Suppose you rephrase your statement as "hurting my feelings" while crouching and hiding your face with your hands. You are telling me that you are a human being and that you are more interested in sharing your feelings than in attacking me. In that case I will not feel so good about angrily snapping at you. In fact, your earnest self-expression might make me feel more like an adult and encourage me to take responsibility for my actions.

-------------------
Making an Agreement
-------------------
This is where the fight has gotten. We had an initial outburst. We did our best to disengage. When we calmed down a little bit, we told each other how we feel, and we listened to how we feel. By now, things are basically peacful. We might be sitting on the couch side-by-side, half-gossiping about stuff that happened at work. But even though things are peaceful, there's still one last thing to do.

Every fight happens for a reason. Suppose you've been saying to me "I don't want you to yell at me any more" and I've been saying to you "well I have a lot of serious anxieties and you can't just throw stuff out of the basement without telling me." Well then this fight happened, at least in part, because I yell and because you keep trying to throw things out of the basement. It's nice that we made peace and are sitting on the couch, but if we don't plan ahead, this same fight is going to keep happening over and over. What we need to do is make an agreement. We will come up with a creative plan of action for how to prevent the same fight from breaking out in the future, and make a serious agreement to stick to that plan.

This is nearly word for word the sort of plan I made with Shari. You say "I want you to promise me that you won't yell at me any more even if you get mad." I say "okay I'll do my best but I've been yelling at my family my whole life and I'm gonna slip up sometimes." You say "It's okay to slip up as long as you try. Just know that if you start yelling at me, I'm gonna walk out the room." And I say "that's fine, that's actually good because once I start yelling I can't really stop."

That's a good agreement. It's realistic. Its reciprocal. But of course, no fight is one-sided. We have to address my feelings to.

So I say "I want you to promise me that you won't throw anything out of the basement without telling me first." And you say "I want to say yes, but that's not really a fair way to ask me to live. This is my house too and I should be allowed to throw boxes out of the basement." So I say "but what if I"m saving them? I have a lot of anxiety about this." So you say "okay, what if we go downstairs right now, and you can chose a pile of things for me to throw out." And I say "okay, but you promise you won't "throw any more out when I'm gone?" And you say "yes I promise."

Plans aren't set in stone. They're supposed to change over time. So don't worry about getting them perfect for eternity. Get them to work for you right now.

You don't have to do what I want. You don't "have" to do anything you're not comfortable with. But if I tell you it's going to erode my life and our relationship, you should pay attention.

in confronting your friend
your goal is to reach an agreement
and be on the same page about that agreement
explain to your friend what you need
and be prepared to give something in return
say "i don't want you to yell at me any more"

your friend may respond with an answer that does not match what you asked for
they may say "yea okay I won't yell so often"
this ambiguous answer leaves you in a precarious position
ask your friend to explicitly commmit to your request
say "please tell me that you won't yell at me any more. this issue is very serious to me"

your friend may suggest that they cannot change their behavior
because their behavior is intrinsic to who they are
they may say "look, i'm just loud. that's how I am, it's not going to change"
remember that you are not asking to change the person
you are asking to change the behavior
remind your friend that you are not asking for a favor
you are expressing a need
say "when you raise your voice, it hurts my feelings. I don't deserve to have my feelings hurt" 

any valid agreement has two parts
your friend will likely ask you to change some aspect of your behavior as well
they may say
"if i'm going to stop yelling, you need to give me some space when i get home from work"
or "you hurt my feelings when you criticize me"
these requests are a very good sign
even if they sound negative
in asking you for a concession, your friend is making themself vulnerable and putting their feelings in your hands
and accept valid criticism
say "you're right. i put a lot of pressure onyou when you get home from work. i'll do my best to give you some space"
respond with positive affirmations
say "thank you for letting me know that i was hurting your feelings to. you are my friend and i love you more than anyone"

if possible, make your agreement explicit
repeat it one more time in the open
look your friend in the eyes and say
"i will do my best to give you space when you get home"
have them say
"and ill do my best not to yell at you any more"
Failure
finally
your confrontation won't always be successful
at the end of the day, you can't force someone else to see your point of view
this does not mean that the confrontation was not worthwhile

for one thing
you have set the stage for a successful discussion in the future
you have established that you want to be treated differently
and you have gotten much essential information onto the table
take this opportunity to write down how the confrontation made you feel
and make your approach more targeted next time

and for another thing
remember that this confrontation was inevitable
if you were to try to hold in your feelings
and avoid the confrontation
then you would be trapped within your feelings
and you would be miserable
just by expressing your feelings, you are no longer trapped
you are stronger than before
and less afraid of your friend's behavior
regardless of how they have responded
do not forget
that this process not really about fixing your relationships
it's about moving on with your life
and that's what you've done


Resolve the Conflict (close it out)


Rocky: i liked the point that our relationship can't work unless we have other realtionships
rocky's mom says "i have a friend for every topic"

rocky's like. i'm not so sure when you said "it's not necessary to know exactly how you feel to solve the problem"
i came back when you said it was okay to wait for now and maybe you'll figure it out later
you need to attack the issue right? you're not just mad about the dishes. you're mad about something real. what is the deeper thing?

act like a little kid. what if they don't take you seriously. does it work? have you tried it?

oliver: that's liek the episode of how I met your mother. barney has to pick up chicks in a childlike voice
intermediate and advanced

me: this isn't just a little suggestion. i want you to this for real
it's not really about forcing an affectation onto yourself. it's about being your true self

if you want to look at it this way, it's ultimately about making yourself look strong/vs weak
the most strong you'll ever be. is stable. is real. and if that means being sad. if that means being anxious and ACTING anxious. so be it

it's not so much "act like a child" as much as it is "act the way that you remember acting as a child"
I really want to say "oh man. that felt so bad :("
but really I say "how dare you speak to me that way"
and when Is ay it, i know that's not how I really felt
and the response isn't the response I was really trying to elicit





Think back to the rules that we all learned as a child. "Don't call names." "Share your toys." "No hitting." 

For one thing, childhood rules are hard for me to disagree with. Suppose we are in an argument and I tell you that you're an asshole. You might respond "how dare you speak to me that way!" but but I might still insist that you're an asshole. However if you say "we're not supposed to call names" I'm very likely to be caught off guard.

This is because I was taught not to call names as a child using a childlike phrase such as "you shouldn't call names." When you repeat to me the same rules that I learned as a child, I reflexively feel that you're right.

Speaking like a little kid is helpful for many reasons. For one thing, expressions such as "say please" and "don't call names" 





Challenging Your Feelings
when you finish criticizing your friend
they might challenge your feelings
for example
your friend might ask "why do you care if I talk to other women?"
or "what's the big deal if i criticize your mom? you do it all the time"
when this happens
remember that you don't need to explain your feelings
and you don't need to justify
you are in pain
and that's all anyone needs to know
when your friend asks you way you care
you can say "i don't know. and i don't need to know"
Resisting the Conversation
your friend will be made uncomfortable by the confrontation
and may claim that the conversation itself is a sort of violence
they may say
"you are hurting me by telling me that i am doing the wrong thing"
or "i can't handle this right now. you are being selfish"
when this happens, remember
that you are never wrong to say how you feel
your feelings are not a form of violence. they are feelings
and you are never hurting anyone by expressing how you feel
so stay strong
when your friend resists the conversation
you can say "i am in pain. i can't put off this conversation"
Reassure your Friend
your friend will tend to get defensive
so along the way, reassure your friend
repeat "i don't wan't to attack you"
or say "i am not accusing you of anything"
repeat positive affirmations
say "i love you and i care about you"
or "you are a good person. nothing is wrong with you"
Your Friend Attacks You
if your friend becomes defensive enough
they may resort to attacking you
these attacks may pertain to the conversation
or be completely irrelevant personal attacks
for example, your friend might say
"you only care about other women because you're getting uglier"
"or you've always been crazy. just like your father"
you have no obligation to tolerate these attacks
say "i am not ugly"
"i am not crazy"
"i am not being selfish"

if you feel that you can hold out
there is a technique which turns these attacks to your advantage
your friend is attacking you
because someone else has hurt your friend in the past
your friend is reenacting a painful event
and turning it against you
and in this process
your friend showing you a weak spot
you can exploit this weak spot
by saying the reverse positive statement to your friend
for example
if your friend says "you're stupid"
you say "well you're not stupid. you're intelligent and thoughtful and i've always wished I was as smart as you"
or if they say "you're ugly"
you say "well you're not ugly. you're attractive and have a attractive body and everyone says so"
even if your friend does not thank you for saying this
you can trust that it will have an effect on them
most people are not used to hearing such earnest positivity
and these statement will throw anyone off guard
The Shoe is on the Other Foot
along the way
your friend will ultimately bring up a good point
that you aren't perfect either
and that you have been hurting or neglecting them too
now the shoe is on the other foot
and it is your turn to feel defensive and scared and ashamed

when this happens
listen carefully to your friend's feelings. don't argue
apologize openly and mean it
if your friend uses negative language
respond with positive language
which soothes their fears
for example
if your friend says "you don't even care about what i do for you"
don't yell back "you're lying! I always say thank you"
it doesn't matter if you say thank you every 5 minutes
something real is making your friend feel this way
so you say "i didn't realize you felt that way. I want to care. please tell me more"

this moment is actually a golden opportunity
because, in telling you that they feel hurt
your friend has shown you another weak spot
exploit it by encouraging them to say more
if they say "you've always wanted to get rid of me"
you say "i would never get rid of you. please tell me more. i want to understand"
When in Doubt, Disengage
all this technique takes focus and energy
if you feel your poise starting to falter
or if your friend is heaping on too much abuse
it's always better to disengage than to speak with poor technique
stop the conversation for 5 minutes, an hour, or as long as you need
say "i'm too worked up right now. but i want to keep talking about this"
or say "i'm feeling emotional. let me take a break"
when you disengage, do so gracefully.
don't just run out and slam the door
this would defeat your goal

it may be difficult to disengage
because now that your friend has gotten worked up
they will be scared to leave the conversation on a bad note
and will try to continue the conversation
so be persistent
repeat "i need a break"
or "we can finish this later"

try not leave on a bad note however
reassure your friend that your relationship is not broken
and that you're not just leaving to make them feel guilty
say "i love you. i care about you more than anyone"
say "you are my friend. nothing will ever change that"
always be honest




----------
Boundaries
----------
Every conflict is about boundaries. Boundaries are an essential part of any relationship. Any time you make a clear distinction between what you are okay with and what you are not you are setting a boundary.

During a conflict 

A conflict is as if you're driving a race car.

 
Strict boundaries are essential
You must not let your boundaries get crossed
You must not cross your partner's boundaries
Your goal is to stay in the middle



==========
Negativity
==========
--------------------
Shame and Punishment
--------------------
Elvis didn't call to schedule 2 payments and now they had to pay a ton after their car got repossessed. Sure. he did the wrong thing. But the point isn't to yell and tell him how bad he is until he decides to be good again. 1. You reality check the man if he needs one. 2. you figure out what needs to change in his life (the reality check is probably related)


 I'm going to get you to look at the play-by-play of what happens in a conflict. I'm going to show you examples of healthy and unhealthy conflicts. We'll look at techniques

 you and your partner can both live a happier life together. As long as you're planning to live together, you owe it to yourself to try to handle your conflicts better. Whatever effort you put into your relationship, you will get back double in the reduction of stress and quadrouple in the understanding and warmth that your partner gives to you. It's doable and it's worth the effort.

And here's why it's doable. The truth is that deep down you and your partner care about each other very much. When two people spend years and decades together, that's what happens, there's no avoiding it. You might not feel like you care about each other, but you do many acts of service for your partner every day which show that you really do. You certainly don't want to hurt each other and you don't want your relationship to be a battlefield or a power struggle.

So then why do you fight? Because you are SENSITIVE PEOPLE caught up in a vicious cycle. All you want to is to be cared for and respected to and treated the way that you want to be treated. And what you'll find is that, as soon as your partner starts to treat you with respect and show interest in your feelings, all positive feelings toward your partner will start flooding back.


A Relationship
A relationship is must more than companionship and love. A human being needs a partner to get by. You need someone who can understand how you feel and help interpret it for you.

As a team, you are contantly working to solve each other's problems. If there's something bothering you in your life, you put that feeling into words, and then you say those words. Although your privacy is your right to keep, there should be no feeling that you can't share with your parnter.

What if your partner doesn't like how you feel? What if you need to tell your partner that you don't enjoy spending time with their mother? Or that you think all the time about quitting your job? Your partner may be unhappy. Your feelings may change the dynamic of your relationship. They may not be able to enjoy things you used to do together. Your partner may be defensive at first, scared, or angry. But ultimately, your partner knows that you did the right thing by saying how you feel.

Conflict
When we have a conflict, here's how it goes down. We get angry at each other. Being angry makes us temporarily crazy. For a little while, my ability to think logically goes down the toilet. I look at you and I see a nuisance or an enemy. And I'm prepared to yell, call names, and do anything to make you stop bothering me and admit that I'm right.

But you're prepared, because you've studied conflict before. And when a fight breaks out, you don't just yell and scream and get crazy. You disengage. You cool down. You take deep breaths. You help me cool down. You tell me reassuring things. You say nice things about me. You bring me back to reality. If I'm still made and I keep trying to bait me into a fight, you don't fall for it. You hold strong until I calm down. If necessary, you leave me alone until I sort myself out.

Then we talk. When we talk, I tell you how I feel even if it makes me feel embarrassed. And you tell me how you feel even if it makes me feel bad. And I listen and I don't judge and I tell you that the way you feel is legitimate. And we argue and we correct each other but we never get ugly. And if I get sarcastic or mean you don't let me get away with it. You step back and make me sort myself out until I'm ready to argue like an adult. And we don't judge or accuse or criticize because we know that we're in this together. And we get all our problems out onto the table.

And once our problems are on the table, we come up with some creative solution that takes care of both of us. And we don't leave until we both know that we're going to get taken care of an not forgotten about. And you don't pressure me to do anything that's beyond my ability. Because you know that a table can't stand on two legs and if I'm in bad shape, you're in bad shape too. And if I pressure you to do something that you're not able to do or not comfortable with, you set me straight. And you let me know that that's not an option for us. And when we come up with terms that we both can agree on, we commit. You look me in the eyes and tell me you'll do what I need you to do.

And when it's over leave, we apologize for any of the yelling or screaming or namecalling or negative things that we did or said. And I reassure you, and tell you how important you are to me. And you tell me that I'm a good person and that you want me to be happy. And if the argument got ugly and you're not happy with how it went down, you're not afraid to set me straight. And you tell me what you need to make it right. And I'm not afraid to accept responsibility. And I commit. And I look you in theyes and tell you I'll do what you need me to do.

And if we can't accomplish this process of of conflict resolution. Whether for lack of self-control, honesty, trust, willinginess & ability. Then I promise to split up with you and you promise to split up with me. Because a relationship that can't resolve conflict just accumulates open wounds.

------------
We're a Team
------------
When you are in a relationship with me, you should feel that we are team fighting together for a common goal. This perspective leads you to view your health and emotions in a pragmatic way.

We're In This Together
A relationship is about helping each other survive life. We cook food, carpool, go out to the movies, get sick, get scared, give advice, lend money. No matter the nature of our relationship, we'll survive best when both of us are happy and healthy. If you get sick, my life gets much worse. Suddenly my life partner who keeps me company and helps me out is laid up in bed. So it's in my best interest take care of you when you're sick and to get to know your body so you don't get sick again. Same thing for you if I get sick. For the sake of our life together, we each need to become experts at seeing to each others' needs.

So over time, we develop a system of living together. We have little rituals that we do every day, like calling each other on the phone or saying goodnight. We each have our little "jobs" like taking out the trash or paying the bills. We have expectations about everything. We have expectations about sex, about our bed time, about how we spend money. Our relationship is alike a factory, and every factory has its procedures. If we get it right, our lives will run happy and smooth. 

But try as we might, no system is perfect. We do our best to take care of each other day by day. But all kinds of problems are bubbling inside us beneath the surface. I have my own problems with work, with my health, with my anxiety. You have your own problems with work, health, and depression. We also have problems with each other. I get cranky and irritated with you. You get neglected and irritated with me. Eventually those problems reach the surface, and they start a conflict. A conflict is when our personal needs come to a head.

Conflict sounds inherrently negative, but it's not. It's an opportunity. This is where we get our problems out on the table. For weeks and months, we have problems simmering in the background; we didn't even know they were there. Now, you have the chance to get your teammate onto the same page as you. There's new information coming into the system. So, we adjust our life to accomodate for the new information. For example, we might have a 11pm betime. But you took an earlier shift at work, and now you're miserable and cranky and that causes a conflict. We assess the situation, we change the routine. That way, we can go on living a sustainable and happy life together.

In order for that to happen, we need 3 things. 1. Honesty. 2. Trust. 3. Willingness & Ability.
Honesty
Our relationship needs to be a place that's completely open. This doesn't mean that we have no privacy. It means that, if something is bothering you, there's nothing stopping you from sharing it with me. We solve our problems as a team. We don't have big secrets. Honesty is especially important when it comes to sharing Bad news. I'm never happy to tell you anything that makes me look stupid or makes you feel bad. But if it's relevant to yours or my health/happiness, I have to do it.

Trust
Trust is the backbone of honesty. You trust that, whatever you tell me, I'm not going to hurt you for it. I might get mad, I might get sad, because I'm only human. But you know that I'm always on your side. I'm never going to cross the line. Whever sort of tantrum I throw, the worst I'll ever be is a big nuisance. It also means that you can trust me as a teammate. You know that I won't invade your life and try to make decisions for you. That I won't try and beat up someone who made you sad. You can trust that I'm reliable and will follow through on my commitments. Trust is the opposite of fear. I'm afraid of you, I don't trust you.

Willingness & Ability
I need to actually be Willing to take care of you, and I need to have the Ability to do it. Unless our relationship has gone sour, I'll always want to take care of you. But can I actually do it? If I'm mentally ill and I need to focus 90% on myself, then we need to change our expectations about our relationship.



Problem
This might sound easy but there is one big obstacle for my taking care of your needs. The obstacle is, I don't see your needs, I don't understand them, I don't think they're legitimate. You try to tell me that you have a problem, and I don't understand what you said. Or I ignore you. Or I get angry at you. Or you're ashamed of your problem so you don't tell me. Or your afraid of what I'll do, so you don't tell me. Or you don't even realize that you have a problem and I don't notice either.


Unhealthy Perspectives
These things are how you might treat sports games. Or how you might need to act at work or in politics. But they cant be the basis healthy relationship.
Looking cool. Maintaining an appearance
Winning. Losing



*notes:
you should always act as if your relationship is a healthy relationship
don't hide thigns from your partner in case they hurt you
that's just sabotaging the relationship before it gets bad
if it's going to get bad, let it get bad, so it ends sooner

rocky: "the tracks guiding a relationship is not lvoe its commitment"

oliver: ironically, a relationship is supposed to be natural
dorian: i consider a relationship to be largely an undoing project


You might think that you're conveying important information about how you feel. But all I'm getting is "you're no good. I don't care about you. I want you to feel bad"

that it's not fair for me to make both of us late; that I'm making you feel disrespected and unimportant. I might even start criticizing you and calling you names.

It's your job to say how you feel. But the important thing is to not be negative. You must avoid all attitudes and words that would hurt Dad's feelings. This means no sarcasm, no yelling, no accusations, no namecalling, no glaring, no bug eyes, no clenched fists, no pointing fingers.

The reason that you do not *act* negative, even if you feel negative, is because acting negative will only inflame the situation. When a dog barks in the house, you don't respond by yelling even louder than the dog. That would only rile the dog up more. In the same way, if dad irritates you, you don't respond with anger and irritation. That's only going to rile dad up and make him want to disrespect you.

You might say "so what am I supposed to do, just let dad walk all over me?" No, of course not. Instead you let dad know that you're not okay with his behavior without being negative.

Throughout this process you might say "this isn't fair. If dad is going to disrespect me, why should I act calm and be nice?" You're right, it's not fair. You deserve to be treated with respect and understanding. But if you want to have a happy life and a happy relationship, you're going to have to get used to being the bigger person.

What if Being Calm Doesn't Work?
You might be all on board with the techniques in the last section. You want to be calm and say how you feel. But what if Dad isn't on board? What if you are sweet and calm and say things like "It hurts my feelings when we're late for the show" but Dad keeps on doing the things that hurt your feelings.
For this situation, you your tool is to use Persistence. Being positive doesn't mean that you have to be a pushover. Be adamant that you must be treated the way that you want to be treated. Continue to repeat phrases like "I don't feel good about this situation." And "I want you to respect how I feel."
When Dad does something that hurts your feelngs, you need to see your hurt feelings as a priority in your life. You may be tempted to ignore those feelings for the sake of returning to the status quo, but that will only feed the tension beneath the surface of your relationship. You deserve an Apology and a Resolution. If you have the time, insist that ou want to continue talking about the issue. If you don't have the time, make it clear that you want to talk about the issue in the future.
You may not be able to get Dad to apologize and resolve the issue the first time. He might try to avoid the discussion for days and days. But eventually, he's going to have no choice but to face you as a human being. This is what you want. You want dad to invest himself in a conversation about your feelings. This might manifest itself as an angry fight. But if it's a fight you need to have, then it's worth getting it over with so you can move closer in your relationship.

Pepper in "I love you and I care about you"

Reopening a Conflict (middle cycle)


-------------
Boundaries
-------------
when you apologize you make yourself vulnerable
someone might take it as the opportunity to attack you
apologize to people who are actually sincere about the apology


Notes from Oliver and Rocky
an apology is an acknowledgement that there was some degree of wrongdoings
until there's some amends made, nothing will happen

when you apologize you make yourself vulnerable
apologize to people who are actually sincere about the apology


Body Language
next consider your body language
you will be likely be nervous and upset
and you will tend to adopt an aggressive / impatient facial expression
such as one of these:
  
features of an aggressive expression include:
furrowed brow
pursed lips
rolled eyes
crossed arms
hands on hips
and shoulders hunched

these postures signal your intention to attack
they bring up your friend's defenses
and make it less likely
that your friend will feel compassionate toward you

ideally
you should adopt an open, relaxed face
relaxed brow
relaxed lips
relaxed shoulders
but since we humans are not perfect
even a neutral stare is perfectly fine