What is the religion that cuts to the chase?

All religions are trying to get at something. But what actually do they want to accomplish with you? What sort of person are you supposed to be if you follow the precepts of the religion?

They want you basically
To be an extremely calm and gentle person
Who helps out other people the the extent of their ability
But remains successful materially
And and ferocious when necessary

Why do you need a religion in the first place?
Because we're not robots. We don't always act logically. Or more important, pro-socially.
We possess within us enough available information to calculate and do much more "the right thing"
But we make ineffective use of that data

Religion is meant to be something we can cling to
Something that's been pre-calculated
So that we can trust and follow it even when we forget what to do

This is very valuable

But the question is. Just how good is your religion at making you calm, helpful, successful, ferocious?

Our brains are like V-Twin engines
They have reciprocating cylinders
That is, the hemispheres of our brain
And all manner of little subsystems
And the problem is that, these systems are not in alignment

It's like the division of labor
2 brain systems on their own can't do much
but together, they can make 300,000 pins a day

The thing is
That the subystems of your brain
operate as if they are separate little people
and so, for them to "synchonize" as machinery
they need to be taught to "get along"
using the same techniques that you would use to help separate people "get along"

this is why so many of us have a problem in the first place
because most of us do not really know how to get along with other people




------------------------------------------
How did I come up with The Good Technique?
------------------------------------------
To manage your life, you need resources. Tools
When I want to be disciplined on my own, it's hard
But when I had 20 people training parkour with me, it was easy
Many training programs will tell you:
Go out and spend time with very disciplined people
This is a good approach
But it can't be the bottom line
I don't always have the time or inclination to cultivate a new friend group
The task "cultivate a specific friend group" can't be the answer to
"how do I develop discipline?"

So, the good technique is about what to do with the baseline resources that everyone has
Even homeless people
You have other people. Maybe a dog. You have a routine.
So, I spend time trying to develop discipline in Rain
And, though it's slow going
It develops discipline in me too
For when I'm by myself. And the cookies only affect me and my body
And i'm the only one who knows about it
















