I wanna talk about how hard life is
and I'm not talking about any system I invented to deal with it
I'm talking about the facts of life
and what every single person needs if you're gonna get through it

first life is complicated and high stakes
and when you forget one thing
every einstein acts like they never forget anything
you need routines. tricks. notepads
but ultimately you run into the problem
that you have limited willpower and mental capacity
ultimately to prioritize. you do triage
there's a certain point where, if you get the top essentials. you're as happy and secure as you need to be
unfortunately, if you don't have the willpower and spare capacity
you find yourself in an unsustainable situation

because life is high stakes
and if one of the essentials falls down
like a  jenga tower it quickly takes the rest of your life down with it

luckily, there's such a thing as efficiency
it has to do with the ORDER that you do things
think of division of labor. adam smitth. pin factory
what you need is a clever system. to get more with less
to at least get the the point that all your important bases are covered

so let's say you have this system
now you run into the problem
you need your reason and willpower to prioritize
but, if things go a little wrong
they start stressing you out. that affects your reason and willpower
quickly your system starts falling to pieces
so your system needs to be simple. sipmle enough to follow even when youer a big mess
and it needs to be an anchor. like a religion. something you can cling to
not a cute little thing like marie condo "this does not spark joy"




this life
it's hard for me
it's complicated and it's high stakes
and the question is, how to live it
here's what i mean

complicated
there's memes all over the internet about this (https://me.me/i/boosh-whatsupboosh-me-how-do-i-do-taxes-school-heres-d10a28165ef943a79e7ea79961bf6844)
people are always saying to me
jesus Dorian, you didn't get your insurance yet? don't you know you can only buy insurance in January?
you didn't get registered to vote?
you didn't register your car?
you didn't get comprehensive coverage? or uninsured motorist coverage?
your didn't chagne the batteries in your carbon monoxide detector?
you didn't give Rain her heart guard? you didn't take the cats for their shots?
you haven't seen the dentist? you haven't had a physical?
don't you know that juice is full of corn syrup? you're eating all that soy? you're eating all the trans fat?
you haven't done your laundry in how long?
you haven't gotten your oil changed? you heard that squeak in yoru car for how long before you got it checked?
you're driving while you're tired?
you forgot to run the unit tests on your code? you put your tasks in the "done column?"
it's almost march and you haven't even gotten started on your taxes?
you cooked that frozen chicken for only 12 minutes?
you stayed out in the sun without a hat? you didn't drink 1 liter of water?
it's been how long since you called your mom?
and on and on

and it's high stakes
any one of these things could totally screw you over
I don't give Rain her heart guard. She could get heartworm and die. She's had it before
If my frozen chicken is pink in the middle. E coli. Salmonella.
Forget to get insurance before January. Get sick. Get fucked.

there's the problem of being your own worst enemy
i binge eat. i eat spicy food. too much sugar
you get bad sleep. stay up too late
do drugs. drink too much
you stay at home too much. be a hermit
you want a girlfriend. but you don't talk to girls

you have mental health problems
you're super anxious
or your're super sad
depressed

you have your desires. and your desires are one big need
you can't live without having things that make life worth living
you need to eat good food
you need entertainment
you need to make art
you need companionship. a partyner. a family.
you need free time. alone time

you have to really hustle
work 10 hour days
cook dinner
do your laundry
keep your uniform oup to date


there's a multiplier problem
that, when things go wrong in this very complicated highs takes life
it's a slippery slope
because, things going wrong make you stressed
and the more stressed out you are
the more difficult it is to remember and balance this infinity of important things
take angie and elivs
they forget to pay the electric bill
going on vacation. they forgot to call the car rental place. they didn't have a credit card.
they fight. they scream
take me, for instance
jeff loses his cell phone. loses his bank card. outright forgot we gave away a kid to his grandma


now there's all kinds of advice and wisdom and judgement
for when you're trying to hustle in life
to be happy
or to get out of a bad rut
it's stuff like
a penny saved is a penny earned
but live each day like it's your last
measure twice cut once
but seize the day
make a good impression
but ignore the haters

you run into this problem of balance
alan watts talks about this
i once had terrible back aches
and the i asked my physical therapist. how far should i go?
she says. well, stop when it hurts.
i say, but it always hurts! what you're having me do hurts
she says, wells top when it really hurts a lot
how much is too much? you don't do enough you have a stiff back
you do too much you have a stiff back
that's called the double bind
people tell you to relax
well rebecca cohen relaxes so much that she misses work
okay so they tell you to seize the day!
well julia worked every shift anyone asksed and burnt out
i watched food inc. they told me to watch what i eat like a hawk
i freaked out and restricted my diet huge
then they told me to stop being so serious. just relax and eat what i want
so I just binge ate all the chocolate i could get
(SMBC comic)
they told me to discipline the dog
so I ended up kicking her and freaking out
then i decided to be hands off
well she dragged me to all the garbage bins in town
positive attitude. get taken advantage of?

the worst double bind
i've tried to eat so healthy
that i can't sleep
i've focused so hard at work
i get a headache
take pills to sleep
now i have a stomach ache
meditate before bed
lost time walking my dog
now she keeps me up
want to exercise to be healthy
muscles ache real bad. can't focus. can't sleep

all of these things you need to survive in life
they become a big priority chart
you can only spin so many plates at once
how much will you talk to your mom?
how much attention are you going to pay to the carbon monoxide detector?
how healthy will you eat?
how much alone time do you really need?

now, the important thing isn't that you get it perfect
it's only that your strategy is sustainable
that you take two steps forward
for every one step back

there is this problem of discipline. willpower
willpower is given as the cure-all for all problems
just focus harder. want it more. grind harder. put in more hours. deny yourself
stop eating hamburgers. get to bed early. put away the screens before bed
your willpower runs out
i've tried to be ultra disciplined. it all came toppling down

so you have this problem
even when you're a big mess
you're an emotional wreck
your life is falling apart
you need the presence of mind to pick the things in life that are important
and drop the things that are not
but not only that
you need the delicate touch. the balance
to not go too ham on any of those important priorities
it sounds like too much

what most of us do. is we develop some negative view of the world
a view that isn't not fully realistic. but it's at least consistent
jon says. i don't want to live that long anyway. i'll kill myself for now
tad says "i'm a loser"
olver says "i'm the smartest and best. i just don't have time for a girlfriend right now"
what does rocky say?
dad and mom say "we're sacrificing ourselves for the family"

the truth is. that it is too much
you can't do any more
but you can become more efficient
if you pick the correct ORDER
that is, if you can prioritize. right now an order of operations
you can actually get much more out of your body and mind
you have this heirarchy of needs right now
everyone's is different. everyone's is dependent on their life right now
and if first. you tacke the alone time
then. you get some human contact
some entertainment
some insurance
some money
you can expaind your ability
you'll find yourself remembering thigns all on your own. without focus
your'll find yourself magically immune to certain stressful things

the problem is, that this order of operations
it's not something you can write out on paper
you have to feel it
it takes that delicate touch. the bility to see wahat's going on in yourself
you have to follow it. like someone following a dousing rod

the easist way
is to focus on somethign else
a keystone habit
that will take care of everything else
you take care of all the workplace accidents
profits will rise. boom

it's an emergent behavior
it's like the ants and this music
you want to command ants?
get good at music
you want the dust to make cool patterns?
make a good rhythm

that keystone habit. is a rock-solid relationship with one other person. to start. ideally more. but one to start